First draft of TTW history page (#3159)
alan-turing-institute/the-turing-way: book/website/history.md

> ## History of The Turing Way project

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# History of The Turing Way project
```

Author: Edited - thanks @da5nsy!

## Development and Growth (2019-2021)

With the addition of Dr. Malvika Sharan in late 2019, The Turing Way expanded into five guides. As a co-founder of Open Life Science (which uses many Mozilla OL frameworks), Malvika helped to incubate what are now key partnerships for The Turing Way. With other key collaborators, she facilitated the creation of 4 more guides (on Project Design, Collaboration, Community, and Research Ethics), alongside a Community Handbook that captured meta-practices by and for other open source communities. The scope and project expanded massively during the 2020-2022 period, as well as transitioned online due to the COVID-19 pandemic.

> # Maintenance & Sustainability (2022-Ongoing)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Maintenance & Sustainability (2022-Ongoing)
```

# History of The Turing Way project

## Founding (2018 - 2019)

*The Turing Way* is the flagship project of the Tools, Practices, and Systems programme.
Founded by Dr. Kirstie Whitaker, the project began as a Book of Reproducible Research in 2018, created by Dr. Whitaker and close allies and partners: assisted in creation by working with members of the REG team at the Turing.
The project was incubated during Kirstie's time as a [Mozilla Open Leader](https://mozilla.github.io/leadership-training/), and was funded by a grant within the Turing.

Due to close relationships with the Jupyter Project, the book was written in JupyterBook.

> A github repository was made for the project, and internal processes decided in how acknowledge of authorship works within the project (i.e. installation of Welcome bot, All-Contributors bot) and collaborative spaces and events to contribute to the guides were created (i.e. Collaboration Cafe, Book Dash).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A github repository was made for the project, and internal processes decided in how acknowledge of authorship works within the project (for instance the Welcome and All-Contributors bots were installed) and collaborative spaces and events to contribute to the guides were created (Collaboration Cafe, and Book Dash were organised).
```

> In-person workshops were given in person on tools aligned with the project: particulary Binder and JupterBook, and the project was presented in many conferences across the UK and internationally.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In-person workshops were given on tools aligned with the project (particulary Binder and JupterBook).
The project was presented in many conferences across the UK and internationally.
```

## Development and Growth (2019-2021)

With the addition of Dr. Malvika Sharan in late 2019, The Turing Way expanded into five guides.

> As a co-founder of Open Life Science (which uses many Mozilla OL frameworks), Malvika helped to incubate what are now key partnerships for The Turing Way.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As a co-founder of Open Life Science (which uses many Mozilla open leadership frameworks), Malvika helped to incubate what are now key partnerships for The Turing Way.
```

Author: corrected for this

This period corresponded with the COVID-19 pandemic lockdowns, which transitioned many processes of contribution, collaboration, and documentation into remote ones.

In part due to this, The Turing Way was able to expand greatly, from one guide on Reproducibility into five different guides related to project design, communication, collaboration, and research ethics.
A global (and multilingual) community began to engage with The Turing Way, and the process of translation/localisation began informally.
A Community Handbook was also established to document best practices that could be used by other communities.
The Fireside Chat series was established in late 2021, facilitating shared spaces with networks and allies from across the open science ecosystem.
The project received a few awards & citations in the 2021 London Mayor report, HiddenREF Awards, and Goldacre Report.

> The Book Dash Planning Committe was established to plan the community's flagship collaboration event.

Reviewer 2: when?

Author: in 2022 - adding this for clarity, good catch @jcolomb!

## Maintenance & Sustainability (2022-Ongoing)

In 2022, Malvika and Kirstie became co-leads of *The Turing Way*, and welcomed Anne Lee Steele as the new community manager.

> As the number of contributors to the project numbers has grown to over 400 people, The Turing Way has also developed into a kind of ["community of communities"](https://ben.balter.com/2019/07/18/a-community-of-communities-oscon-2019/) with many ongoing projects developing alongside the expansion of the guides, demonstrating the need for internal systems that enable the sustainability and maintenance of the project more broadly.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As the number of contributors to the project has grown to over 400 people, The Turing Way has also developed into a kind of ["community of communities"](https://ben.balter.com/2019/07/18/a-community-of-communities-oscon-2019/).
Many ongoing projects have been developing alongside the expansion of the guides, demonstrating the need for internal systems that enable the sustainability and maintenance of the project more broadly.
```

# History of The Turing Way project

## Founding (2018 - 2019)

> *The Turing Way* is the flagship project of the Tools, Practices, and Systems programme.

Reviewer 3: I'm not sure if this is the best sentence to start things with: 
1) that wasn't the case in the beginning and 
2) what does this tell anyone outside of the Turing?

Reviewer 4: Yes - agree with @EstherPlomp - TPS came after The Turing Way!

> Founded by Dr Kirstie Whitaker, the project began as a Book of Reproducible Research in 2019.

Reviewer 4: Technically the funding came through in 2018 and then we launched at the SSI Collaborations Workshop in 2019.

Author: Adding this in - thought maybe it should be moved further up?

Dr. Whitaker and [close allies and contributors](https://github.com/the-turing-way/the-turing-way/blob/main/ways_of_working.md#previous-project-members), who were already championing reproducible practices in data science and co-development the first version of *The Turing Way* book.
The project team included researchers, librarians, data scientists and Research Engineers, from both The Alan Turing Turing and the institutes across the UK.
The project has its roots in the [Mozilla Open Leadership](https://mozilla.github.io/leadership-training/), a programme that led to Kirstie's Mozilla Fellowship in 2016, which influenced her as a researcher and strengthened her commitment to working open.

*The Turing Way* has been funded by The Alan Turing Institute since the very beginning.

> Due to close relationships with the Jupyter Project, the book was written in JupyterBook.

Reviewer 5: That is not the entire truth.
The goal of The Turing Way is to provide a 21st-century book -- not static, and something that allows interactivity and creativity. JupyterBook at the time was the only option that allowed combining executable notebooks with flat MarkDown files.
JupyterBook has since inspired Quarto's development that offers this feature.

I suppose the other reason that you are highlighting ties to our commitment to build on existing open source technology and ensure that we have the opportunity to contribute back to the Jupyter system that is a critical open source infrastructure.

Reviewer 5: That's true. I think there might be an issue somewhere. @sgibson91 can probably share here as she was involved in the early days.

Reviewer 5: Ok, so speaking with Kirstie:
- 21st-century element was priority as well as ensuring upstream, contributions
- Bookdown was not executable - and Jupyter was offering that solution
- Also, we had a close connection with the Jupyter Book team which could offer advice and support

> A GitHub repository was made for the project, and internal processes decided in how acknowledge of authorship works within the project (i.e. installation of Welcome bot, All-Contributors bot) and collaborative spaces and events to contribute to the guides were created (i.e. Collaboration Cafe, Book Dash).

Reviewer 3: I don't think we can use i.e. according to the style guide?

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
A GitHub repository was made for the project, and internal processes decided in how acknowledge of authorship works within the project (i.e. installation of Welcome bot, All-Contributors bot) and collaborative spaces and events to contribute to the guides were created (such as Collaboration Cafe, Book Dash).
```

In-person workshops were given in person on tools aligned with the project: particulary Binder and JupterBook, and the project was presented in many conferences across the UK and internationally.

## Development and Growth (2019-2021)

> With the addition of Dr. Malvika Sharan in late 2019, The Turing Way expanded into five guides.

Reviewer 3: There's a bit of a repeat with the expanding into the five guides with the next paragraph, and I think it can be more clearly explained that Malvika provided the capacity to do so and did not literally add the five guides herself - although almost of course :)

Reviewer 5: Are you saying Malvika did not write all the 100s of chapters? 😆

Reviewer 4: Yes - these two things are related but not causal - we got additional funding and hired @malvikasharan AND expanded because reproducibility on its own is not sufficient to address the major challenges (including incentive challenges!) faced by research data scientists.

Author: a

> As a co-founder of Open Life Science (which uses many Mozilla OL frameworks), Malvika helped to incubate what are now key partnerships for The Turing Way.

Reviewer 4: This really needs to be more nuanced about how Open Life Science AND The Turing Way are inspired by the Mozilla Open Leadership training programme.

Both @malvikasharan and I credit Mozilla Open Leadership with transformational mentorship that has led us to contribute to changing the world through open and inclusive science practices.

OLS and TTW had parallel development rather than one coming before the other... I don't think OLS needs to be specifically mentioned in the history of The Turing Way project page.

@malvikasharan - what do you think?

[EDIT: I'm in a call with Malvika now - she agrees 😅]

Author: Very true! I think this was something that was visible to me when I joined the team - but might be confusing for people who are just looking to learn about the project's history in a specific, contained way!

The project received a few awards & citations in the 2021 London Mayor report, HiddenREF Awards, and Goldacre Report.
The Book Dash Planning Committe was established to plan the community's flagship collaboration event.

## Maintenance & Sustainability (2022-Ongoing)

In 2022, Malvika and Kirstie became co-leads of *The Turing Way*, and welcomed Anne Lee Steele as the new community manager.
As the number of contributors to the project numbers has grown to over 400 people, The Turing Way has also developed into a kind of ["community of communities"](https://ben.balter.com/2019/07/18/a-community-of-communities-oscon-2019/) with many ongoing projects developing alongside the expansion of the guides, demonstrating the need for internal systems that enable the sustainability and maintenance of the project more broadly.
Initial governance work began in 2022, with hybrid hubs hosting events across multiple time zones and working groups developed to formalise localisation and translation, reviewing & editing, training and mentorship, accessibility, and infrastructure within the project.

> 2023 saw the incubation of The Turing Way Practioner's Hub that aims to bring The Turing Way into the hands and ways of working of industry leaders, as well as a transition into a separate Github organisation for The Turing Way project.

Reviewer 3: Maybe rewrite the next two sentences with The Turing Way as the main objective instead of the year. Now it looks like we're passively guided by time instead of via active thought/actions!
